in this video I am going to explain sampling
sampling is the process of representing a signal using its values or samples taken at equally spaced points in time
reconstruction is the process of reconstructing a signal from its samples using interpolation
sampling and reconstruction can be both applied to continuous time and discrete time signals
because of the advances in digital technologies such as computers processing discrete time signals is more flexible and therefore it is more preferable to processing continuous time signals
therefore sampling of continuous time signals is mainly used for discrete time processing of continuous time signals
this figure shows the discrete time processing of continuous time signals
here the continuous time signal x c of t is first converted to the discrete time signal x of n through sampling
after processing the discrete time signal x of n in a discrete time system the system output y of n is again converted back to the continuous time signal y c of n with interpolation
sampling of discrete time signals is mainly used for changing the sampling rate of discrete time signals
for example different digital audio systems may use different sampling rates as a result it is important to convert the sampling rate of the signals for system compatibility
in this video I am going to explain the basics of sampling for continuous time signals but most of these also hold for discrete time signals
let's start with the sampling theorem
as given in the figure an infinite number of signals can generate the same set of samples
for instance if we take the samples at integer multiples of capital t both of the signals in the figure will share the same set of samples
therefore we would not expect to uniquely specify a signal by a sequence of equally spaced samples in the absence of additional conditions
if a signal is band limited and if the samples are taken sufficiently close together then the samples uniquely specify the signal and we can reconstruct the signal from its samples perfectly
taking sufficiently close samples means choosing a sampling frequency that is greater than twice the highest frequency present in the signal
this is known as the sampling theorem
I am going to explain the sampling theorem in more detail in the upcoming slides
a convenient way of taking equally spaced samples from the continuous time signal is using an impulse train
if p of t represents a periodic impulse train with period capital t
the multiplication of the continuous time signal with the impulse train results in the sampled signal x p of t
here capital t represents the sampling period and omega s represents the sampling frequency
the original signal the impulse train p of t and the sampled signals signal x p of t are shown graphically in the slide
now let's analyze the frequency domain characteristics of these signals
assume that the continuous time signal has the spectrum given on the upper right corner of the slide
note that it is a band limited signal and the highest frequency component occurs at omega m
as you know the fourier transform of a periodic impulse train is also a periodic impulse train in the frequency domain
and from the multiplication property multiplication in the time domain corresponds to convolution in the frequency domain
so when we convolve the spectrum of the continuous time signal with the spectrum of the impulse train we obtain the spectrum of the sampled signal as given below
note that the spectrum of the sampled signal has replicas at the integer multiples of the sampling frequency
if the replicas of the original signal do not overlap
we can obtain the spectrum of the original signal from the sampled signal by applying a low pass filter with gain capital t and with a cuff off frequency
which is greater than omega m and less than omega s minus omega m
in other words the continuous time signal can be recovered perfectly from the sampled signal by means of a low pass filter
if there is no overlap between the replicas in the spectrum of the sampled signal
this condition is satisfied if the sampling frequency is greater than two times of the maximum frequency of the continuous time signal
this result is referred to as the sampling theorem
the frequency two omega m is commonly referred to as the nyquist rate
if the sampling theorem is violated
in other words if the sampling frequency is less than the nyquist rate we have ended up the below spectrum for the sampled signal
here the shifted replicas overlap and this is referred to as aliasing
in this video I have explained sampling in particular sampling theorem
in the next video I am going to explain reconstruction of a signal from its samples using interpolation
thank you